Initial insert of jte tutorial (#78)
javalin/javalin.github.io: _posts/tutorials/2020-08-23-javalin-jte-example.md

---
layout: tutorial
title: Rendering jte templates in Javalin
permalink: /tutorials/jte
summarytitle: Rendering jte templates in Javalin
summary: Learn how to do type-safe server side rendering using jte.
date: 2020-08-23
author: <a href="https://github.com/casid" target="_blank">Andreas Hager</a>
language: ["kotlin", "java"]
github: https://github.com/casid/jte-javalin-tutorial
---

## Introduction

> Even in the age of reactive web apps, server-side rendering is still the way to go if SEO is a requirement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: I would cut this, people who are still doing server side rendering probably know why they want it.

Author: You're probably right :-D

[jte](https://jte.gg/) is a modern, type-safe template engine, that glues HTML and Java with as little extra syntax as possible.
In this tutorial you will learn how to use jte in Javalin.

To begin, you'll need to have a Maven project configured [(→ Tutorial)](/tutorials/maven-setup).

## Project setup
To use jte, you need to add the library as dependency:
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>gg.jte</groupId>
    <artifactId>jte</artifactId>
    <version>1.0.0</version>
</dependency>
```

The Javalin jte extension comes with Javalin 3.10.0, so make sure to use the latest Javalin version:
```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.javalin</groupId>
    <artifactId>javalin</artifactId>
    <version>3.10.0</version>
</dependency>
```

In case you use IntelliJ, I'd highly recommend to install the [jte plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/14521-jte).

> It offers full completion and refactoring support and it is what makes working with jte so much fun!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It offers full auto-completion and refactoring support, and makes working with jte a lot of fun!
```

Create the directory `src/main/jte` in your project.
In this directory create a file `hello.jte` and enter the following:

```html
Hello jte!
```

{% capture java %}
package app;

public class App {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Javalin app = Javalin.create().start(7000);

        app.get("/", ctx -> ctx.render("hello.jte"));
    }
}

{% endcapture %}
{% capture kotlin %}
package app

object TutorialKotlin {
    @JvmStatic
    fun main(args: Array<String>) {
        val app = Javalin.create().start(7000)

        app.get("/") { ctx -> ctx.render("hello.jte") }
    }
}
{% endcapture %}
{% include macros/docsSnippetKotlinFirst.html java=java kotlin=kotlin %}

Fire up your browser and open [http://localhost:7000](http://localhost:7000).
You should see `Hello jte!` displayed. 

With the server still running, change the content of `hello.jte` to this:

```html
Hello jte!
The current timestamp is ${System.currentTimeMillis()}.
```

Refresh the page in your browser and you should see something like this:

```html
Hello jte! The current timestamp is 1598159163249.
```

jte supports hot reloading of templates out of the box \o/

## Error handling

> jte does everything to pass meaningful error messages to the developer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
jte does everything it can to pass meaningful error messages to the developer.
```
